(DOCSP-29226): KotlinX Serialization (#48)
mongodb/docs-kotlin: source/fundamentals/data-formats/serialization.txt

      ``build.gradle.kts`` dependencies list:

      .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: build.gradle.kts

        implementation("org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-serialization-core:{+serializationVersion+}")

   .. tab::
      :tabid: Maven

      If you are using `Maven <https://maven.apache.org/>`__, add the following to
      your ``pom.xml`` dependencies list:

      .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: pom.xml
   
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.jetbrains.kotlinx</groupId>
            <artifactId>kotlinx-serialization-core</artifactId>
            <version>{+serializationVersion+}</version>
        </dependency>

Annotate Data Classes
---------------------

Once added, you can annotate your data classes with ``@Serializable`` annotation 
that comes from the Kotlin Serialization framework.

.. note:: 

    You cannot use :ref:`annotations <fundamentals-data-class-annotations>` 
    from the ``org.bson.codecs.pojo.annotations`` package on ``@Serializable`` data classes.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/KotlinXSerializationTest.snippet.basic-serialization.kt
    :language: kotlin

.. _kotlin-custom-codec:

> 

Reviewer: Add note here that you can then use your data classes in your code MongoCollections and the kotlinx serialization framework will handle the Bson / Kotlin serialization.

Reviewer 2: Added

> Create a Custom Codec

Reviewer: Suggestion change title to relate to customizing what is stored.

Reviewer 2: Renamed -- let me know if it still needs tweaking

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

The Kotlin driver supports the ``kotlinx.serialization`` library for serializing 
and deserializing Kotlin objects. 

The driver provides an efficient ``Bson`` serializer that can can be used with 
classes marked as ``@Serializable`` to handle the serialization of Kotlin objects 
to BSON data. 
The ``bson-kotlinx`` library also supports :ref:`custom codecs <kotlin-custom-codec>`
with configurations to encode defaults, encode nulls, and define class 
discriminators.

.. note::

   To use the ``Codec`` interface to specify custom encoding and decoding of 
   Kotlin objects to BSON data, see the :ref:`Codecs <fundamentals-codecs>` 
   documentation.

Although you can use the Kotlin driver with the Kotlin serialization ``Json`` 
library, the ``Json`` serializer does *not* directly support BSON value types such
as ``ObjectId``. You must provide a custom serializer that can handle the 
conversion between BSON and JSON. 

Supported Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Kotlin driver supports: 

- All Kotlin types that are supported by the Kotlin serialization library 

> - All available :manual:`BSON types </reference/bson-types>`

Reviewer: Thats good :+1:

      dependencies, add the following to your ``build.gradle.kts`` dependencies list:

      .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: build.gradle.kts

        implementation("org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-serialization-core:{+serializationVersion+}")

   .. tab::
      :tabid: Maven

      If you are using `Maven <https://maven.apache.org/>`__ to manage your 
      dependencies, add the following to your ``pom.xml`` dependencies list:

      .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: pom.xml
   
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.jetbrains.kotlinx</groupId>
            <artifactId>kotlinx-serialization-core</artifactId>
            <version>{+serializationVersion+}</version>
        </dependency>

Annotate Data Classes
---------------------

To declare a class as serializable, annotate your Kotlin data classes with the 
``@Serializable`` annotation that comes from the Kotlin serialization framework.

You can use your data classes in your code as normal after you mark them as serializable.
The Kotlin driver and the Kotlin Serialization framework will handle the 
BSON serialization and deserialization.

> This example shows a simple data class annotated with the following: 

Reviewer: Yes and yes

- ``@Serializable`` to mark the class as serializable
- ``@SerialName`` to specify the name of the ``id`` and ``manufacturer`` properties 
   in the BSON document. This can be used in place of the ``@BsonId`` and 
   ``@BsonProperty`` annotations, which are unsupported in serializable classes.

> - ``@Contextual`` to mark the BSON ``id`` property to use the ``ObjectIdSerializer``.

Reviewer: Suggest: property to use the builtin ``ObjectIdSerializer``.

Reviewer 2: Updated

.. _fundamentals-kotlin-serialization:

====================
Kotlin Serialization
====================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

The Kotlin driver supports the ``kotlinx.serialization`` library for serializing 
and deserializing Kotlin objects. 

The driver provides an efficient ``Bson`` serializer that can can be used with 
classes marked as ``@Serializable`` to handle the serialization of Kotlin objects 
to BSON data. 
The ``bson-kotlinx`` library also supports :ref:`custom codecs <kotlin-custom-codec>`
with configurations to encode defaults, encode nulls, and define class 
discriminators.

.. note::

   To use the ``Codec`` interface instead of the Kotlin serialization library 
   to specify custom encoding and decoding of Kotlin objects to BSON data, 
   see the :ref:`Codecs <fundamentals-codecs>` documentation. You might choose
   Kotlin serialization if you are already familiar with the framework or 

>    you prefer idiomatic Kotlin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   you prefer to use an idiomatic Kotlin approach.
```

The Kotlin driver serialization support depends on the official Kotlin 
serialization library. You must add `Kotlin Serialization <https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization>`__ 
to your project:

.. tabs::

   .. tab::
      :tabid: Gradle

      If you are using `Gradle <https://gradle.org/>`__ to manage your 
      dependencies, add the following to your ``build.gradle.kts`` dependencies list:

      .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: build.gradle.kts

        implementation("org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-serialization-core:{+serializationVersion+}")

   .. tab::
      :tabid: Maven

      If you are using `Maven <https://maven.apache.org/>`__ to manage your 
      dependencies, add the following to your ``pom.xml`` dependencies list:

      .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: pom.xml
   
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.jetbrains.kotlinx</groupId>
            <artifactId>kotlinx-serialization-core</artifactId>
            <version>{+serializationVersion+}</version>
        </dependency>

Annotate Data Classes
---------------------

To declare a class as serializable, annotate your Kotlin data classes with the 

> ``@Serializable`` annotation that comes from the Kotlin serialization framework.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``@Serializable`` annotation from the Kotlin serialization framework.
```

You can use your data classes in your code as normal after you mark them as serializable.
The Kotlin driver and the Kotlin serialization framework will handle the 
BSON serialization and deserialization.

This example shows a simple data class annotated with the following: 

- ``@Serializable`` to mark the class as serializable.
- ``@SerialName`` to specify the name of the ``id`` and ``manufacturer`` properties 
  in the BSON document. This can be used in place of the ``@BsonId`` and 
  ``@BsonProperty`` annotations, which are unsupported in serializable classes.
- ``@Contextual`` to mark the BSON ``id`` property to use the built-in ``ObjectIdSerializer``.

>   This annotation is required for BSON types to be serialized properly.

Reviewer 3: nit
```suggestion
  This annotation is required for BSON types to be serialized correctly.
```

.. _fundamentals-kotlin-serialization:

====================
Kotlin Serialization
====================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

The Kotlin driver supports the ``kotlinx.serialization`` library for serializing 
and deserializing Kotlin objects. 

The driver provides an efficient ``Bson`` serializer that can can be used with 

> ``@Serializable`` classes to handle the serialization of Kotlin objects to BSON data. 

Reviewer 2: updated

The ``bson-kotlinx`` library also supports :ref:`custom codecs <kotlin-custom-codec>`

> with configurations such as encoding defaults, encoding nulls, and defining class 
> discriminators.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with configurations to encode defaults, encode nulls, and define class 
discriminators.
```

Reviewer 2: updated

.. note::

    To use the ``Codec`` interface to specify custom encoding and decoding of 
    Kotlin objects to BSON data, see the :ref:`Codecs <fundamentals-codecs>` 

>     documentation.

Reviewer 3: Two things:
1. I think the text here is one space too indented
2. Same as my comment on the codecs page, why would users choose one approach over the other?

Although you can use the Kotlin driver with the Kotlin Serialization's ``Json`` 

> library, the ``Json`` serializer does *not* directly support BSON value types such

Reviewer 3: Question: what is "Kotlin Serialization"? Why is Serialization capitalized?

Reviewer 2: it's referring specifically to the official framework. I've updated for clarity

as ``ObjectId``. You must provide a custom serializer that can handle the 
conversion between BSON and JSON. 

Supported Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Kotlin driver supports all Kotlin types that are supported by the Kotlin 
Serialization library and the following BSON types:

- ObjectId
- BsonNull
- BsonArray
- BsonBinary

> - BsonBoolean

Reviewer 3: Q: Is there a list you can link to instead of having all of them on this page?

Reviewer 2: updated to link out to https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/bson-types/

- BsonDateTime
- BsonDbPointer
- BsonDocument
- BsonDouble
- BsonInt32
- BsonInt64
- BsonDecimal128
- BsonMaxKey
- BsonMinKey
- BsonJavaScript
- BsonJavaScriptWithScope
- BsonObjectId
- BsonRegularExpression
- BsonString
- BsonSymbol
- BsonTimestamp
- BsonUndefined
- BsonDocument
- RawBsonDocument
- RawBsonArray

> Any additional types can be supported using custom serializers. See the 
> `official Kotlin Documentation <https://kotlinlang.org/docs/serialization.html>`__ 
> for more information.

Reviewer 3: I: remove passive voice

```suggestion
You/The driver can handle any other types by implementing a custom serializer. See the 
`official Kotlin documentation on serialization <https://kotlinlang.org/docs/serialization.html>`__ 
for more information.
```

Reviewer 2: Updated

Add Kotlin Serialization to Your Project
----------------------------------------

The Kotlin driver serialization support depends on the the official Kotlin 

> Serialization library. You must add `Kotlin Serialization <https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization>`__ 

Reviewer 3: S: I think we should refer to this library as either Kotlin serialization library (lowercase s) or as the `kotlinx.serialization` library

Reviewer 2: updated

to your project:

.. tabs::

   .. tab::
      :tabid: Gradle

>       If you are using `Gradle <https://gradle.org/>`__, add the following to your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      If you are using `Gradle <https://gradle.org/>`__ to manage your dependencies, add the following to your
```

Reviewer 2: Updated

      ``build.gradle.kts`` dependencies list:

      .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: build.gradle.kts

        implementation("org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-serialization-core:{+serializationVersion+}")

   .. tab::
      :tabid: Maven

      If you are using `Maven <https://maven.apache.org/>`__, add the following to
      your ``pom.xml`` dependencies list:

      .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: pom.xml
   
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.jetbrains.kotlinx</groupId>
            <artifactId>kotlinx-serialization-core</artifactId>
            <version>{+serializationVersion+}</version>
        </dependency>

Annotate Data Classes
---------------------

To declare a class as serializable, annotate your Kotlin data classes with the 

> ``@Serializable`` annotation that comes from the Kotlin Serialization framework.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``@Serializable`` annotation from the Kotlin serialization framework.
```

Reviewer 2: updated

> Once declared as serializable, use your data classes in your code as normal. 

Reviewer 2: updated

The Kotlin driver and the Kotlin Serialization framework will handle the 
BSON serialization and deserialization.

.. note:: 

    You cannot use :ref:`annotations <fundamentals-data-class-annotations>` 

>     from the ``org.bson.codecs.pojo.annotations`` package on ``@Serializable`` data classes.

Reviewer 3: S: move this note after the code snippet

Reviewer 2: moved

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/KotlinXSerializationTest.snippet.basic-serialization.kt

>     :language: kotlin

Reviewer 2: added

For more information on serializable classes and available annotation classes, 
see the `Kotlin Serialization <https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/blob/master/docs/basic-serialization.md#serializable-classes>`__ 
documentation.

.. _kotlin-custom-codec:

Customize the Serializer Configuration
--------------------------------------

> You can use the ``KotlinSerializerCodec`` class located in the ``org.bson.codecs.kotlinx`` 

Reviewer 2: updated

package to create a codec for your ``@Serializable`` data classes and 
customize what is stored.

Use the ``BsonConfiguration`` class to define the configuration, 
including whether to encode defaults, encode nulls, or define class discriminators.

To create a custom codec, install the ``bson-kotlinx`` dependency to your project.

.. tabs::

   .. tab::
      :tabid: Gradle

      If you are using `Gradle <https://gradle.org/>`__, add the following to your
      ``build.gradle.kts`` dependencies list:

      .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: build.gradle.kts

        implementation("org.mongodb:bson-kotlinx:{+full-version+}")

   .. tab::
      :tabid: Maven

      If you are using `Maven <https://maven.apache.org/>`__, add the following to
      your ``pom.xml`` dependencies list:

      .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: pom.xml
   
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.jetbrains.kotlinx</groupId>
            <artifactId>bson-kotlinx</artifactId>
            <version>{+full-version+}</version>
        </dependency>

> Then you can define your codec using the `KotlinSerializerCodec.create() <apidocs/bson-kotlinx/bson-kotlinx/org.bson.codecs.kotlinx/-kotlin-serializer-codec/-companion/create.html>`__ 

Reviewer 2: fixed

> Then you can define your codec using the `KotlinSerializerCodec.create() <apidocs/bson-kotlinx/bson-kotlinx/org.bson.codecs.kotlinx/-kotlin-serializer-codec/-companion/create.html>`__ 

Reviewer 2: updated

method and add it to the registry:

.. code-block:: kotlin
    :copyable: true

   import org.bson.codecs.configuration.CodecRegistries
   import org.bson.codecs.kotlinx.BsonConfiguration
   import org.bson.codecs.kotlinx.KotlinSerializerCodec

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/KotlinXSerializationTest.snippet.custom-serialization.kt

>     :language: kotlin

Reviewer 2: added
